# CSS Layout: Position
#css #layout #position

The `position` property specifies the type of position method used.
There are 5 different values:
- `static` (default)
- `relative`
- `fixed`
- `absolute`
- `sticky`

Elements are then positioned using `top`/`bottom`/`left`/`right` properties.
However, the `position` must be specified first.
The `position` value also influences the behavior of these properties.

## Static positioned elements

Static positioned elements aren't affected by `top`/`bottom`/`left`/`right` properties.
Nothing special. It's always positioned according to normal page flow.

## Relative positioned elements

Relative positions are relative to its normal position
Setting `top`/`bottom`/`left`/`right` cause it to be adjusted away from normal position.
Other content will not be adjusted to fit into any gap left by the element.
```css
div.relative {
  position: relative;
  left: 30px;
  border: 3px solid #73AD21
}
```

## Fixed positioned elements

Fixed positioned elements are positioned relative to the view port.
It always stays in the same place even if the page is scrolled.
`top`/`bottom`/`left`/`right` are used to position the element.
It does not leave a gap in the page where it normally would be located.

## Absolute positioned elements

Absolute positioned are relative to the nearest positioned ancestor
(instead of relative to viewport, like `fixed`).
However, if an absolute positioned element has no positioned ancestors,
it uses the document body and moves along with page scrolling.
Absolute positioned are removed from normal flow, and can overlap elements
```css
/* 
   These two overlap,
   lining up on the right border of the relative div
*/
div.relative {
  position: relative;
  width: 400px;
  height: 200px;
  border: 3px solid #73AD21;
}

div.absolute {
  position: absolute;
  top: 80px;
  right: 0;
  width: 200px;
  height: 100px;
  border: 3px solid #73AD21;
}
```

## Sticky positioned elements 

Sticky positioned are positioned based on the user's scroll position.
Element toggles between `relative` and `fixed` based on scroll position.
It is relative until a given offset is met in the viewport,
then it "sticks" in place like `fixed`.
`top`/`bottom`/`left`/`right` must be specified for it to work.
