# CSS Layout: Float and Clear
#css #layout #float #clear #clearfix #box-sizing #flexbox #grid

The `float` property specifies how an element should float.

The `clear` property specifies what elements 
- can float beside the clear element
- and on what side

## `float`

Used for positioning and formatting content
e.g. let an image float left to the text in a container

Values:
- `left`: element floats to the left of its container
- `right`: element floats to the right of its container
- `none` (default): element does not float, just displayed where it is
- `inherit`: element inherits value from its parent

Example:
```html
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html>
<head>
<style>
div {
  float: left;
  padding: 15px; /* gives width to each div */
}
.div1 {
  background: red;
}
.div2 {
  background: yellow;
}
.div3 {
  background: green;
}
</style>
</head>
<body>
  <h2>Float next to each other!</h2>
  <div class="div1">Div 1</div>
  <div class="div2">Div 2</div>
  <div class="div3">Div 3</div>
</body>
</html>
```

## `clear`

When we use `float`, and we want the next element below (not right/left)
then we have to use `clear`.

`clear` specifies what should happen with the element that is next to a
floating element. It can have any of the following values:
- `none` (default): element is not pushed below left or right floated elements
- `left`: pushed below left floated elements
- `right`: pushed below right floated elements
- `both`: pushed below both left and right floated elements
- `inherit`: inherit value from parent element

When clearing floats, we should match the clear to the float.
If an element is floated left, then you should clear left.
```css
div1 {
  float: left;
}
div2 {
  clear: left;
}
```
The floated element will continue to float but the cleared elements
will appear below it on the page.

### clearfix hack

If a floated element is taller than its containing element
it will "overflow" outside of the container.

We add a "clearfix" hack to solve the problem:
```css
.clearfix {
  overflow: auto;
}
```
This works as long as we can keep control of margins and padding.
This modern clearfix hack is safer to use:
```css
.clearfix::after { /* `::after` is a pseudo-element */
  content: "";
  clear: both;
  display: table;
}
```

### `box-sizing`

_Note to self: Flexbox or grid is probably a better solution_

We could easily create three floating boxes side by side.
However, when you add something that enlarges the width of each box,
like padding or borders, the box will break.

`box-sizing` allows us to include the padding and border in the box's
total width (and height), making sure the padding stays inside the box
and that the box does not break.

```css
* {
  box-sizing: border-box;
}

.box {
  float: left;
  width: 33.33%; /* three boxes */
  padding: 50px; /* if we want space between the image */
}
```
